Controller Blog Post (#13)
anoma/anoma-blog: isaac/controllers.md

image: media/
imageAlt: 
imageCaption: 
excerpt: 
---

Here we set out to _generalize_ the "wrapped tokens" from [IBC](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/8d9d3b6fe7309b034df8457760b3bbd11d24b8e1/archive/papers/2020-05/build/paper.pdf#L2) and [ICS20](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/main/spec/app/ics-020-fungible-token-transfer/README.md).
We create a sound and efficient way to safely transfer arbitrary mutable digital objects (not just tokens) between mutually distrusting chains, tracking precisely how "trustworthy" each object is, and what "promises" each chain has made. 
Our approach is based on [taint tracking](http://www.tcse.cn/~wsdou/papers/2022-dsn-dista.pdf) and _endorsement_ from [Information Flow Control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_flow_(information_theory)) research, with the added twist that modern blockchains can have the power to _review_ and _verify_ histories of other chains, using [recursive ZKPs](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/370), [optimistic proofs](https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2024/03/19/optimism-finally-starts-testing-fault-proofs-at-heart-of-design-and-of-criticism/), or simply fully replicating the other chain's state machine.

> TODO: actual ART-report link

Reviewer: This exists now - https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10498997

Reviewer: Or if you wanted the art.anoma.net link - https://art.anoma.net/list.html#paper-10498997

This [state machine can be replicated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/State_machine_replication) to enhance availability and fault tolerance.
We call the authoritative state machine of a digital object its _controller_.

For example: bank accounts are mutable digital objects; their controller is the bank's database.
Tokens and NFTs are objects; their controller is a blockchain. 
Most of the files on most computers could be called mutable digital objects, and the controller of each is the computer it's stored on.

Without some kind of controller, different parties may have contradictory notions of what the state is, and no way to reconcile them.
In a distributed system, some controllers may be [Byzantine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Byzantine_fault), and make duplicitous or incoherent statements about state. 
In general, an object is only as _trustworthy_ as its controller: if Alice's bank account says she has lots of money, but Bob doesn't trust Alice's bank, then Alice's "money" doesn't mean much to Bob. 

> In general, applications can only use objects on the same controller: ethereum transactions only use ethereum smart contracts and accounts, and so on.  

Reviewer: style note: capitalize "Ethereum"

Unfortunately, when applications need to share a controller  to interact, there is an incentive to push all applications onto one controller trustworthy enough (and with enough throughput) for everyone. 
Attempts to create such a controller typically require trust in a single authority (e.g. [AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/appsync/)) or an extremely expensive global consensus (e.g., [Ethereum](https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper)) and remain inadequate for some applications:
 JP Morgan does not trust Ethereum to control their accounts, [which is why they maintain their own generic application controller](https://www.jpmorgan.com/onyx/about).
In fact, it is unlikely that _all_ worthwhile applications will ever agree on a controller who can manage all of their state.
This is why interoperability is so important: the internet works not because we all trust some single authority to manage all of it but because many different applications in different trust domains can interact. 

> Here we are concerned with cases where objects _transfer_ between controllers: we have to track controllers may have affected each object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we are concerned with cases where objects can be _transferred_ between controllers, and therefore we have to track which controllers may have affected each object.
```

We then want _base chain_ to somehow "review" the changes made on _L2_, and somehow be able to treat the object like it was never on _L2_ at all.
We need to remove _L2_ from the object's tag.
In [Information Flow Control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_flow_(information_theory)) research, this is similar to _endorsement_, [a fairly well-explored problem](https://doi.org/10.1145/3133956.3134054).

<figure>
    <img src="media/wrapping-unwrapping.png" alt="wrapping and unwrapping a token as it's transferred across chains" />
  <figcaption>with [IBC](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/8d9d3b6fe7309b034df8457760b3bbd11d24b8e1/archive/papers/2020-05/build/paper.pdf#L2) and [ICS20](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/main/spec/app/ics-020-fungible-token-transfer/README.md), users can transfer tokens between chains, "destroying" the original, and creating "wrapped" tokens, which are "unwrapped" when they are transferred back. 
</figcaption>
</figure>
TODO: better IFC-style wrapping/unwrapping diagram

> The blockchain setting, however, introduces a unique twist: instead of relying on _trust_ as the main basis for endorsement, modern blockchains can have the power to _review_ and _verify_ histories of other chains, using [recursive ZKPs](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/370), [optimistic proofs](https://www.coindesk.com/tech/2024/03/19/optimism-finally-starts-testing-fault-proofs-at-heart-of-design-and-of-criticism/), or simply fully replicating the other chain's state machine.

Reviewer 2: It might be helpful for the reader to name some examples, especially the recursive ZKP interoperability techniques; 
- [Agg Layer](https://mirror.xyz/0xfa892B19c72c2D2C6B10dFce8Ff8E7a955b58A61/TXMyZhhRFa-bjr7YHwmJpKBwt2-_ysirbh_VpNy3qZY)
- ZK IBC 

or any others you know of. The reason it's important is that the [industry is starting to realize](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CF-F-jbA630&pp=ygUcYnJpZGdlcyBhcmUgYSBzY2FtIHNodW1vIGNodQ%3D%3D) that [ZK will be crucial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b_ElApwRvkY&pp=ygUSYmVsbCBjdXJ2ZSB1bWEgcm95) for interoperability going forward. As an example, my own [naïveté](https://research.anoma.net/t/controllers-from-first-principles/66/2?u=apriori)

In this blog post, we explain what properties we are trying to maintain, why we think these properties are important, and how they fit into the larger Anoma ecosystem. 
We will touch on some of the machinery under the controller tag operations, but leave most of those details to the [technical report](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/84mxa8jb7muiar76twg16/art_controllers-9.pdf?rlkey=xcaj31k59riay7cvqwwi73s13&dl=0).

## System Model
### Resources

TODO: for the blog post, this section could be shorter somehow. 

The digital objects we use in Anoma are called [resources](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10498990).
We can encode extremely general mutable state with resources, but resources themselves are fairly simple.
Resources have very limited mutable state: they are _not yet created_ by default, can transition to _created_, and then to _consumed_.
However, each resource can carry arbitrary immutable data, specified by the resource's unique ID (which can be a hash).

> 

Reviewer 2: A Resource can only have one controller, if I understand correctly. Maybe worth mentioning?

> Each controller's state carries cryptographic accumulators (e.g. [Merkle roots](https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-48184-2_32)) representing the set of resources created by transactions ordered by this controller and the set of resources consumed.

Reviewer 2: By cryptographic accumulators, you are referring both to $CMtree$ and $NFset$?

> If a resource is neither created nor consumed, it is _not yet created_.

Reviewer: (and, from the perspective of any query, not yet even existent)

As part of their immutable data, resources can have complex proof obligations (which we call _resource logics_) determining when they can be created or consumed, and these may depend on the state of other resources.
A resource logic can for example, specify exactly what programs can consume this resource: it would require a proof that the resources created are precisely the outputs of running a particular program with the consumed resources as inputs.
Such a proof might be as simple as a full execution trace of the program, or as complex as a [zero-knowledge proof](https://eprint.iacr.org/2021/370).
Through these logics, resources can encode fairly arbitrary state, not limited to scalar registers or tokens, while still allowing [ZKP-style confidential transactions](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10498990).
Crucially, resource logics can also constrain _where a resource can be transferred_: not all resources will be able to be transferred to all controllers. 

### Controller Tags

> Each resource's _controller tag_ is part of this immutable data.

Reviewer 2: Is the controller tag information encoded in $r.label$ ? or is there another field that needs to be added to the resource to include:

- The creating controller
- The terminal controller
- A dependency graph (DAG) detailing which controllers may have corrupted the resource if they were Byzantine

It details which controllers define this resource's state.
Resources transition between these states in transactions ordered by controllers.
Each resource's tag therefore specifies a single controller that can order transactions for each type of transition, ensuring there is a single authority in charge of deciding whether each transition has or has not occurred:
- The resource's _creating controller_ determines if the resource has been created.
- The resource's _terminal controller_ determines if the resource has been consumed.

> Transactions which perform a state transition but are ordered by the wrong controller are _invalid_.

Reviewer 2: what would be an example of this scenario?
- Controller B attempts to order Alice's resource `C` which belongs to Controller A?

### Transactions
All state updates occur in [Transactions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_transaction): atomic updates that designate a set of _input_ resources (which must be previously _created_) that are _consumed_, and a set of _output_ resources (which must not yet have been created) which are _created_.
Transactions can only update state controlled by one controller, and must include checkable proofs that the relevant resource logics of each resource created or consumed are satisfied.
However, input resources may have been _created_ in a transaction on another controller.

> Therefore, controllers can sync with one another, allowing transactions to check if resources on other controllers have been created.

Reviewer 2: can you elaborate on what this means? 

> therefore, controllers can sync with one another, allowing transactions to check if resources on other controllers have been created

These updates can be asynchronous, so it is possible a transaction will not immediately be able to prove that a resource has been created.

### Controllers

> Controllers order transactions: each controller decides on an ever-growing sequence of transactions defining the execution _trace_, and thus the current state, of a state machine.

Reviewer 2: going thought the report, thought this was the strongest one sentence definition of a controller. maybe worth elevating.

Controllers do not necessarily compute and store this state themselves, although it may be efficient to do so.

> Committing to an ever-growing sequence of transactions, however, does require that controllers keep _some_ state, to ensure they do not _fork_: commit two contradictory traces (neither is a prefix of the other).

Reviewer 2: what happens when the commitment tree and nullifier set grow too large? pruned somehow?

We also have to update the "parental" graph of send and receive records: the "children" of the "removable" send record become "children" of its parents. 
Parental endorsement turns out to be very powerful: in fact, we cannot generally remove send records without parents. 

### Checking SRH
It is possible to check if a resource has SRH, but it requires getting recent state roots from all its _affecting controllers_, and their endorsement map entries for each other, and checking if there is some sequence of transactions from the endorsed states to the most recent states.
With enough recursive ZKPs, this could be an acceptable computation out-of-band, but it's very expensive to do as part of every transaction. 
This is where a little trust goes a long way: if applications (or users) have specific controllers they trust to maintain specific resources, then they can do fast computations with cross-chain resources while maintaining rigorous guarantees.

## Conclusion

> The anoma ecosystem will feature digital resources which can easily transfer across mutually-distrusting instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Anoma ecosystem will feature digital resources which can easily be transferred across mutually-distrusting instances.
```

Our controller tag infrastructure allows applications to make specific guarantees about their resources.

> By maintianing CCT, applications can use resources whose controllers they trust, and be sure they're working with serializable resource histories, ruling out double-consumes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By maintaining CCT, applications can use resources whose controllers they trust, and be sure they're working with serializable resource histories, ruling out double-consumes. 
```
